---
layout:     post   				                    # 使用的布局（不需要改）
title:      Basic Commutative Algebra		# 标题 
subtitle:   Class 2
date:       2022-11-17 				# 时间
author:     Baiyang Zhang 						# 作者
header-img: img/mathArt9.jpg 	#这篇文章标题背景图片
catalog: true 						# 是否归档
tags:								#标签
    - Math
    - Commutative Algebra
    - Notes
---

**Theorem.** If $f:A\to B$ is a ring homomorphism, then the kernel of $f$ ($:= f^{-1}(0)$) is an ideal of $A$, since $f$ preserves multiplication. The image of $f$ is a subring of $B$. Since $\text{ker}(f)$ is a ring of $A$, we can construct a quotient ring $A / \text{ker}(f)$, which is isomorphic to $\text{img} f$.

In the following we define some important concepts. 

A `zero-divisor` is an element in ring $A$ that in a sense "divides zero", i.e. $x\in A$ is a zero divisor if there exists non zero element $y\in A$ such that $xy=0$. A trivial zero-divisor is zero itself.

**Definition.** A `domain` is a nonzero ring in which ab = 0 implies a = 0 or b = 0. (Sometimes such a ring is said to "have the zero-product property ".) Equivalently, a domain is a ring in which 0 is the only left zero divisor (or equivalently, the only right zero divisor). A *commutative* domain is called an `integral domain`.

Integers $\mathbb{Z}$ form an integral domain (hence the name), another important example of integral domain is the ring of polynomials with coefficients taken from field $k$, denoted by $k[x_{1},\dots,x_{n}]$.

An element $x\in A$ is said to be` nilpotent` if $x^n = 0$ for some integer $n$. a nilpotent element is a zero-divisor, but the converse is not necessarily true. 

A `unit` in $A$ is an element $x$ that "divides" 1, namely there exists elements  $y\in A$ such that $xy=1$. The element $y$ is then uniquely determined and written as $x^{-1}$. **The units of $a$ forms an abelian group.** 

**Definition.** A `principal ideal` is an ideal form by multiples of an element $x\in A$, denoted by $(x)$ or $Ax$. 

If $x$ is a unit, then 
$$
(x) = (x x^{-1}) = (1) = A.
$$
In other words, the principal ideal of a unit is the ring itself. 

**Definition.** A `field` is a ring where $1 = 0$ and every non-zero element is a unit, i.e., every non-zero element has an inverse. 

For example, the set of rational numbers $\mathbb{Q}$ is a field since every quotient $\frac{x}{y}$ has an inverse $\frac{y}{x}$. 

Every field is also an integral domain since there can't be zero divisors, but the converse is not necessarily true, for instance $\mathbb{Z}$ is not a field but a integral domain.

**Proposition.** Let $A$ be a non-zero ring. Then the following are equivalent:
1. $A$ is a field,
2. the only ideals are $(0),(1)=A$,
3. every homomorphism from $A$ to a non-zero ring $B$ is injective. 

*Proof.*  $(2)\implies(3)$. Given a homomorphism $f: A\to B$, the kernel of $f$ is an ideal of $A$, it can only be either $0$ or $A$ itself. If $\text{ker}(f) = A$ then the image is 0, which disagrees with our assumption that B is non-zero. Thus $\text{ker}(f)=0$. Then the map is injective.

**Definition.** An ideal $\frak{p}$ in $A$ is `prime` if $\frak{p}\neq (1)$ and $xy\in {\frak p} \implies x\in {\frak p} \text{ or } y \in \frak{p}$. An ideal ${\frak m}$ is `maximal` if ${\frak m} \neq A$ and there is no ideal ${\frak a}$ such that ${\frak m} \subset {\frak a} \subset A$ (strict inclusion). 

Notice the definition of prime ideal is different from that of prime numbers, a number $p$ is said to be prime if $p \mid xy\implies p\mid x \text{ or } p\mid y$. For example, 6 is not prime since $6\mid 2\times 3$ but $6\nmid 2$ and $6\nmid 3$. 

There might be more than one maximal ideals in $A$. ${\frak m}$ is a maximal ideal only means that there is no bigger ideals between ${\frak m}$ and $A$, and there could be more than one ideals satisfy this property. For example, in the ring of integers, all ideals generated by prime numbers $(p)$ are maximal. 

**Theorem.**
- ${\frak p}$ is prime $\Leftrightarrow$  $A / {\frak p}$ is an integral domain,
- ${\frak m}$ is maximal $\Leftrightarrow$  $A / {\frak m}$ is a field.

A prime ideal can't be written as the section or two ideals. Conversely, if an ideal is the section of two other ideals, then it  is not prime. A maximal ideal is always prime, since $xy\in{\frak m}\implies x\in{\frak m}$ or $y\in{\frak m}$. If not, we can always combine these two ideals and make a bigger one, then ${\frak m}$ wouldn't be the maximal idea. 

If the zero ideal is prime, then $xy=0$ implies $x=0$ or $y=0$, then $A$ has no zero-divisors and it is an integral domain.

In general, homomorphic maps will preserve the properties defined by multiplication and addition. If $f:A\to B$ is a homomorphism and ${\frak p}$ is a prime ideal of $B$, then $f^{-1}{\frak p}$ is a prime ideal in $A$. However, maximal ideals are not defined by multiplication or addition, so homomorphism in general does not preserve it, let ${\frak m}$ be the maximal ideal in $B$, $f^{-1}({\frak m})$ may not be the maximal ideal in $A$, there could be a bigger ideal in $A$.  

**Prime ideals are most important to the whole of commutative algebra.** 

**Theorem.** Every ring (commutative) $A\neq {0}$ has at least one maximal idea. 

**Corollary.** 
1. If ${\frak a}\neq(1)$ is an ideal of $A$, then there is a maximal ideal containing ${\frak a}$ (could be ${\frak a}$ itself). 
2. Every non-unit of $A$ is contained in a maximal idea. 

**Definition.** There exists rings with exactly one maximal ideal, for example fields. A ring $A$ with exactly one maximal ideal ${\frak m}$ is called a `local ring`. The field $k= A / {\frak m}$ is called the `residue field` of $A$. 




