---
layout:     post   				                    # 使用的布局（不需要改）
title:      Basic Algebraic Geometry Class 15		# 标题 
subtitle:   Affine Schemes
date:       2023-04-24 				# 时间
author:     Baiyang Zhang 						# 作者
header-img: img/mathArt17.jpg 	#这篇文章标题背景图片
catalog: true 						# 是否归档
tags:								#标签
    - Math
    - Commutative Algebra
    - algebraic geometry
    - Notes
---

*Disclaimer: Nothing in this note is original.*

So far we have talked a lot about algebraic varieties, they have the following properties.
- algebraic varieties are defined over some algebraically closed fields, 
- they are finitely generated and without nilpotent,
- they have only closed points (with Zariski topology).

Now we introduce a related but more modern concept, called `schemes`. In comparison to varieties, schemes have the following properties,
- They don't need to be defined over any algebraically closed fields,
- they provide a broad, robust frame work,
- they have better algebraic and functorial properties, in a sense we will elaborate later.

A scheme is roughly speaking made of the following three pieces of information.
- A scheme consists of a set with topological structure and a structure sheaf (means that you can define functions on them),
- is glued together from affine schemes,
- is defined in analogy to algebraic varieties.

### Affine scheme as a set

Let $R$ be a unital, commutative ring. 

**Definition.** The `affine scheme` associated to $R$, or the `spectrum` of $R$ is the set $\text{Spec}(R)$ of all **prime ideals** of $R$. 

**Example 1.** Let $R = K[X]=\mathcal{O}(X)$, the coordinate ring of an affine variety over some algebraically closed field $K$. Then $\text{Spec}(R)$ is the spectrum, i.e., the prime ideals of $\mathcal{O}(X)$. It is the **affine scheme associated to $X$**. Note that 
$$
X = \text{mSpec}(R) \subset \text{Spec}(R)
$$
since a point $(a_ {1},\dots,a_ {n})$ is given by the ideal $(x_ {1}-a_ {1},\dots,x_ {n}-a_ {n})$, and $X$ is made of all its points. However the prime ideals are more than just points, it also includes irreducible varieties. 

If we consider the elements of a spectrum as generic points, then since
$$
\text{Spec}R := \left\{ \text{Points} \right\}  \cup \left\{\text{irred. subvarieties} \right\} 
$$
we should also consider the irreducible subvarieties as points in the scheme. We have generalized the concept of points in varieties. 

**Example 2.** The polynomial ring in one variety $K[T]$ where $K \subset \overline{K}$ (meaning $K$ is algebraically closed). The maximal ideals are $(T-t)$ for some $t \in K$, but there is also a prime ideal which is not maximal, namely the ideal generated by zero $(0)$. It is trivial indeed but a prime ideal nevertheless. So when speaking of the scheme, the points include both the usual points on $K$ together with the entire $K$ itself.

**Example 3.** The ring of integers $\mathbb{Z}$.  The spectrum of $\mathbb{Z}$ is 
$$
\text{Spec}\mathbb{Z} = \left\{ (p) \,\middle\vert\, p \text{ is a prime number } \right\} \cup\left\{ 0 \right\} .
$$
Those are the points in the scheme.

- - -

Having defined the underling set of a scheme, we would like to continue and somehow define the "functions" and topology on the scheme. 

Recall the case with varieties and structure sheaves. Functions on a variety are nothing but maps from the variety to the field over which the variety is defined on, for example for a variety as as subspace of complex manifold, the functions on it are just complex functions. However, regarding scheme, we don't have a algebraically closed field to begin with! We just have an underlying set, namely the spectrum of some ring $R$. Fortunately, we can construct the field, called the `residual field`, from the ring. Recall that for a maximal ideal ${\frak m}$ the quotient $R / {\frak m}$ is a field, and for a prime ideal ${\frak p}$ the quotient $R / {\frak p}$ is a integral domain. Given a point ${\frak p}$ in the scheme, which is a prime ideal in $R$, we can consider $R / {\frak p}$, if ${\frak p}$ is also a maximal ideal then we instantly have a field, but if ${\frak p}$ is just prime then we would have an integral domain. Again, lucky for us, we already know how to turn an integral domain into a field: just take the fraction of it! For example, $\mathbb{Z}$ is a integral domain but the rational numbers $\mathbb{Q}$ form a field. So, given a point in the scheme, there is always a way to construct a field based on the point. 

**Definition.** Let $X = \text{Spec}R$ and ${\frak p}\in X$, 
1. the `residual field` $\kappa({\frak p})$ of $X$ at ${\frak p}$ is defined to be the field of fractions of $R / {\frak p}$.
2. if $f\in R$, then the value $f({\frak p})$ of $f$ at ${\frak p}$ is the image of $f$ under 
$$
R \to R / {\frak p} \to \kappa({\frak p}).
$$

**Example 4.** Let $X$ be an affine variety over field $K$ and $R=\mathcal{O}(X)$ be the coordinate ring of it, then the residual field $\kappa({\frak p})$ is just $K$ itself if ${\frak p}$ is maximal; if ${\frak p}$ is prime but not maximal, then ${\frak p}$ is the ideal of some irreducible subvariety $Y\subset X$, the residual field $\kappa({\frak p})$ is $R / {\frak p}=R / I(Y)$ is nothing but the coordinate ring on $Y$! Amazingly, it reproduces the usual evaluation of polynomial function on points if ${\frak p}$ is a maximal idea. The reader can try to come up with the simplest example and convince yourself of it.

**Example 5.** Let $R = \mathbb{Z}$ and every element of $\mathbb{Z}$ automatically become a function on $\mathbb{Z}$. Consider the function $7$, $7$ evaluated at $5$ is $7$ in the residual field $\mathbb{Z} / (5)=\mathbb{Z}_ {5}$, which is $[2]$.

- - -

Equipped with this, we can define something similar to the zero locus in algebraic varieties. 

Let $X=\text{Spec}R$ be an affine scheme, take any subset $S\subset R$. Each element in the scheme has two roles, they are both points and function defined on those points. Of course any element of the ring is a function on the scheme, but only the  elements in the scheme are points. First, consider $S$ as functions, then we can talk about there common zero points. 

**Definition.** The `zero locus` $V(S)$ of set $S$ is 
$$
V(S) := \left\{ {\frak p}\in X \,\middle\vert\, s({\frak p})=0 \;\forall\; s\in S \right\} 
$$
where $s$ are regarded as functions. However, $s({\frak p})=0$ means $s = 0 \text{ mod } {\frak p}$, which means $s\in{\frak p}$ where $s$ has become again an element of $R$, thus the zero locus of some subset $S\subset R$ is actually the set that contains all the elements of $S$,
$$
V(S) = \left\{ P \,\middle\vert\, S\subset P \right\} .
$$

Next, we can consider $S$ as a set of points, then it makes sense to talk about the corresponding ideals whose zero locus reproduces the set $S$. 

**Definition.** The `ideals` of a set $S$ is 
$$
I(S) := \left\{ f\in R \,\middle\vert\, f(p)=0 \;\forall\; p\in S \right\}. 
$$

Given a ring, we can define a scheme on it by picking up all its prime ideals, then these ideals themselves also form a space, with their own subspace and varieties. The construction of a scheme from a ring is like a matryoshka, a ring structure is included in another. 

- - -

It is relatively straightforward to  introduce a topological structure in a scheme, we just endow it with the by now familiar Zariski topology, where the vanishing sets are defined to be closed set. To be specific,

**Definition.** The `Zariski topology` on $X=\text{Spec }R$ is the topology whose closed sets are the sets $V(S)$ where $S\subset R$. 

One important consequence of this definition is that, 