---
layout:     post   				    # 使用的布局（不需要改）
title:     Notes on Coleman-Weinberg Potential			# 标题 
subtitle:   
date:       2023-1-13 				# 时间
author:     Baiyang Zhang 						# 作者
header-img: img/mathArt8.jpg 	#这篇文章标题背景图片
catalog: true 						# 是否归档
tags:								#标签
    - ColemanWeinbergPotential
    - EffectiveTheory
    - Coleman
---

### Quantum Effective Action

The goal of this chapter is to introduce the quantum action and quantum potential. There are usually two kinds of quantum actions, one is the Wilsonian quantum action, where the higher momentum modes are integrated out to obtain an effective theory at a lower energy\footnote{For example, if we want to integrate a field out at the tree-level, we set $\hbar\to 0$ and in the path integral, only the classical solution contributes. We can replace the field by its classical solution to equation of motion in the Lagrangian.}.
The other is the quantum effective actions which is a Legendre transformation of the generating functional of connected diagrams, we will talk more about it in the next section. When replacing the original action, the tree-level diagrams generated by the effective quantum action contains all the quantum corrections of the full theory (i.e. the original theory). The quantum effective action has a useful property that it can give us the vacuum expectation value (VEV) of the field operator with quantum correction.
As we will see,  Coleman-Weinberg potential is a special case of the effective action.

There are in general three ways to calculate the effective action, namely
- by matching, that is to require
$$\int \mathcal{D}\{\text{original dof}\} e^{iS}
    = \int \mathcal{D}\{\text{effective dof}\} e^{i\Gamma}
$$
where dof stands for the degree of freedom, the LHS is the original theory, while the RHS is the effective theory, with different degree of freedom.
- by Legendre transformation, as will be shown in the next section, and
- by background field method, that is to separate the field into a static non-propagating background field $\phi_b$ and a dynamic propagating field $\tilde{\phi}$, the dynamic fields are the fluctuations around the background field. Integrate the fluctuations out will we have an effective potential $\Gamma[\phi_b]$,
$$
\int \mathcal{D} \phi e^{i S[\phi_b + \tilde{\phi}]}
= e^{i\Gamma[\phi_b]}.
$$

Actually there is another way by guessing. Since the effective action must obey the same symmetries as the original action, people can try to write down all the local terms meet that criterion, leaving the coefficients to be determined by experiments.

For the sake of simplicity we will constrain our discussion to $\phi^4$ model with real scalar fields.

### Quantum Action

The partition function is
$$
 Z[J] = \int \mathcal{D} \phi e^{iS[\phi] + i\int \phi J}
$$
where $S$ is the action, $J$ is the source, $\int \phi J$ is short for $\int dx^4 \phi(x) J(x)$. $\phi$ field is integrated out hence $Z$ is a functional of $J$ only.

From it we can define $W[J]$ by
$$
  Z[J] = e^{iW[J]} \implies W[J] = -i \ln Z[J],
$$
$W[J]$ is the summation of connected diagrams with source, refer to Mark Srednicki's text book on quantum field theory. It is the generating functional of connected diagrams.

The expectation value of $\phi$ in the presence of a source $J$ is given by
$$
 \left\langle {\phi}_J \right\rangle=\frac{1}{Z} \int \mathcal{D} \phi e^{iS[\phi] + i\int \phi J} \phi
 = \frac{\delta W[J]}{\delta J(x)}\equiv \varphi,
$$
Note the difference between $\phi$ and $\varphi$, one is a operator while the other is a classical field. When compared to the classical dynamics, $W$ is similar to the Lagrangian $L$, $J$ is similar to $\dot{q}$, $\delta W / \delta J$ is similar to $\partial L / \partial \dot{q}$ which define a new variable. Perform the Legendre transformation we define a new functional, the quantum action,
$$
\boxed{
  \Gamma[\varphi] = W[J] - \int J\varphi
  }
$$
note that $\Gamma$ is a functional of $\varphi$. We have
$$
  \frac{\delta\Gamma}{\delta\varphi} = -J.
$$

- $\Gamma[\varphi]$ generates the 1-particle irreducible (1PI) diagrams
- $W[J]$ generates connected diagrams
- $Z[J]$ generates all kinds of diagrams

**Remark.**  There are also two definitions for the quantum effective action, one by requiring that the tree diagrams of the effective action includes all the quantum effects of the original action, and the other by the Legendre transformation. It is not obvious but they are equivalent to each other. To see this, we can first DEFINE $\Gamma[\phi]$ to be whose tree diagrams gives us all the quantum effects, then since $iW[J]$ also gives all the quantum effects with loops, we have
$$
e^{iW[J]} = \lim_{\hbar\to 0} \int \mathcal{D}\phi e^{i\Gamma[\phi]/\hbar}
$$
where the limiting isolates out the tree contribution, then use the fastest descent approximation we find $\Gamma$ can be written as the Legendre transformation of $W[J]$.

To see that $\Gamma$ generates only the 1PI diagrams, recall that quantum effective action has the property that the tree-level graphs generated by it gives the complete scattering amplitude. Think of $\Gamma[\varphi]$ as in the place of action $S$, we will have a new path integral
$$
  Z_\Gamma[J] = \int \mathcal{D}\phi e^{i\Gamma +i\int \phi J}.
$$
It will generate Feynman diagrams with sources, just like the original action $S$ does, only this time the tree diagrams alone is enough to give the complete information of the original theory. Thus $\Gamma$ must gives us exact propagators and exact n-point vertices, while the original action $S$ gives us the ordinary propagator and ordinary vertex. Also in order to calculate the exact n-point vertex, we need not consider the 1-particle reducible diagrams since any contribution from connected diagram can be written as a tree diagram comprised of two or more sub 1 particle IRREDUCIBLE diagrams.

**Remark.** The generating functionals such as $W[J]$ and $\Gamma[\varphi]$ are classical. In fact the language of path integral is highly classical, in the sense that each path, namely each field configuration is a c-field of space of time, instead of q-field.

#### Tree-level Example

In the classical limit, taking the limit $\hbar \to 0$, the partition function become
$$
  Z = \int \mathcal{D}\phi e^{iS + i\int \phi J}
$$
which receives dominant contribution from the stationary configuration, given by
$$
  \frac{\delta}{\delta\phi}\left( S + \int \phi J \right) = 0
  \implies \frac{\delta S}{\delta\phi} = - J
$$
which has a solution $\varphi$. Thus the partition function is
$$
  Z = e^{iS+i\int \varphi J}
$$
up to a normalization factor. Since
$$
  W[J] = -i \ln Z = S + \int \varphi J,
$$
we have
$$
\varphi = \frac{\delta W}{\delta J} = \left\langle {\phi}_J \right\rangle
$$
thus
$$
  \Gamma[\varphi] = W - \int \varphi J = S[\varphi].
$$
At the tree-level, the quantum effective action and the original action are the same.

### Effective Potential

In the classical dynamics, the vacuum (lowest energy state) configuration of the system is given by the minimum of the potential. In the quantum theory, we are sometimes interested in the vacuum expectation value (VEV) of the field operator $\phi$. In a quantum field theory, there is also have a potential term whose minimum gives the classical vacuum field configuration, however that's not the full story, since in a quantum theory the field always fluctuates around the vacuum, giving rise to a correction to $\left\langle \phi \right\rangle$.

We want a quantum effective potential which works like the classical potential, in the sense that its minimum corresponds to the field configuration of the vacuum, quantum corrections included. Luckily we already have something like that, i.e. the quantum effective action.

Recall that the quantum effective action

- is a functional of $\varphi$, and $\varphi = \left\langle {\phi}_J \right\rangle$, meaning $\varphi$ is the expectation value of $\phi$ in the presence of a source term $J$
- satisfies ${\delta \Gamma}/{\delta \varphi} = J$
thus
- when $J=0$, the solution to ${\delta \Gamma}/{\delta \varphi} = J$ is the vev of $\phi$.


Furthermore, assume that the vacuum has translation symmetry, meaning $\left\langle \phi \right\rangle$ is a constant in space and time, then we just need one number to denote the field configuration, we can define a function $\mathcal{V} _ {\text{eff}}$ whose minimum is the vev of $\phi$,
$$
  \Gamma[\varphi]|_{\varphi = \text{const}} = -VT \mathcal{V}_{\text{eff}}(\varphi)
$$
where $V$ is the volume of the space and $T$ the extension of time, $\mathcal{V}_{\text{eff}}(\varphi)$ is the quantum effective potential. We can see that $\mathcal{V}_{\text{eff}}$ is a intensive quantity while $\Gamma$ is a extensive quantity, and ${\partial\mathcal{V}}/{\partial\phi} = 0$ reproduces ${\delta \Gamma}/{\delta \varphi} = 0$.

## Coleman-Weinberg Potential

### Background Fields

The method of background method is very useful for calculating beta functions and effective action. For a real scalar field $\phi$, the general idea is as following

- separate the field into the static background field $\phi_b$ and dynamic field $\phi$, $\phi \to \phi_b + \phi$. By static we mean it is not path-integrated, thus don't propagate. It will simplify the calculation a lot.
- Define the corresponding action with background field $S_b[\phi_b;\phi]$, and resulting generating functional $W_b[\phi_b;\phi]$, and the effective action $\Gamma_b[\phi_b;\varphi]$, where $\varphi$ is defined to be the vev of $\phi$ in the presence of the background field $\phi_b$.
- $\Gamma_b[\phi_b;\varphi]$ has the useful property that
$$
\Gamma_b[\phi_b=\phi;0] = \Gamma_b[\phi_b=0;\varphi] = \Gamma[\varphi].
$$
The first term means that the effective action with background field $\phi_b = \phi$ and zero dynamic field $\varphi = 0$. Since the dynamic field will be set to zero at last, if a diagram has dynamic field external legs, it is also zero. It is  similar to the Feynman diagrams with sources, when we set $J=0$ in the end then all the diagrams with a un-canceled source vanish.


The reason why $\phi_b$ does not propagate can be seen in two ways, namely in the context of canonical quantization and path integral.

**Canonical:**  the background field $\phi_b$ is regarded as a classical field, it is not quantized thus there is no such thing as $\phi_b$ propagator,
**Path integral:** $\phi_b$ don't fluctuate, means it is left out of the path integral, recall how we came to the propagator in the first place, it means $\phi_b$ don't propagate.


The action with a background field is defined as
$$
  S_b[\phi_b;\phi] = \int d^4x\mathcal{L}(\phi_b+\phi),
$$
the partition function with source is
$$
  \mathcal{Z}[\phi_b;J] = \int \mathcal{D}\phi \exp\{ i S_b[\phi_b;\phi]+i\int J\phi \} = \mathcal{Z}[J] e^{-i\int J\phi_b},
$$
note that the source only couples to the dynamic field. Since $\phi$ is integrated over, $\mathcal{Z}$ can only be a functional of $\phi_b, J$. Define the generating function as
$$
  W_b[\phi_b;J] \equiv -i \ln \mathcal{Z}_b[\phi_b;J] \implies W_b[\phi_b;J] = W[J] - \int J\phi.
$$
Define
$$
  \varphi_b(x) = \frac{\delta W_b[J]}{\delta J(x)}
$$
we have
$$
  \varphi_b = \varphi - \phi_b
$$
which means that in the presence of a background field, $\left\langle \phi \right\rangle$ will be shifted by $\phi_b$, which is kind of natural.

Now we need to define the effective action in the presence of a background field, by the means of Legendre transformation again.
$$
  \Gamma_b [\phi_b;\varphi_b] = W_b - \int \frac{\delta W_b[J]}{\delta J}J = W_b - \int \varphi_b J
$$
you can check that
$$
  \frac{\delta \Gamma_b[\phi_b;\varphi_b]}{\delta\varphi_b}= J .
$$
Replace $W_b[J]$ with its expression in terms of $W[J]$, we can check that
$$
  \Gamma_b[\phi_b;\varphi_b] = W[J] - \int J (\varphi_b+\phi_b) = \Gamma[\phi_b + \varphi_b]
$$
so for example if we want to calculate $\Gamma[\eta(x)]$, we can set $\phi_b = \eta,\,\varphi = 0$ and use that to simplify calculations.

### Coleman-Weinberg Potential

Consider the real scalar Lagrangian
$$
  \mathcal{L} = -\frac{1}{2} \phi \partial^2\phi - \frac{1}{2} m^2\phi^2
   - \frac{1}{4!}\phi^4,
$$
the question is, when $m = 0$, will the quantum effects modify the shape of the potential?

Introduce a background field $\phi \to \phi_b +\phi$, take it into the action and expand, keep in mind that the path integral is over field $\phi$, we have
$$
\begin{align}
  e^{i\Gamma[\phi_b]} &= e^{i\int d^4 x (-\frac{1}{2} \phi_b \partial^2 \phi_b-V(\phi_b))} \\ \\
&\times\int \mathcal{D}\phi e^{i \int d^4 x (-\frac{1}{2} \phi \partial^2 \phi  -V(\phi_b) - \phi V'(\phi_b)-\frac{1}{2}V''[\phi_b]\phi^2-\frac{1}{3!}V'''[\phi_b]\phi^3-\cdots)}.
\end{align}
$$
In the path integral, one of the terms in the Lagrangian, i.e. $\int \mathcal{D} \phi e^{i\phi V'}$ can be thrown away because we only need to consider 1PI diagrams in the calculation of $\Gamma$, while the Feynman diagram given by $\phi V'(\phi_b)$ will never contribute to the 1PI diagrams. For the same reason we can also discard $\phi^3$ term in the Lagrangian. At one loop, there will be no contributions from $\phi^4$ and higher terms either. Hence we are left with
$$
  e^{i\Gamma[\phi_b]} = e^{i\int d^4 x (-\frac{1}{2} \phi_b \partial^2 \phi_b-V(\phi_b))} \int \mathcal{D} e^{i \int d^4 x (-\frac{1}{2} \phi \partial^2 \phi -\frac{1}{2}V''[\phi_b]\phi^2)}.
$$
use the master formulae in QFT
$$
  \int\mathcal{D}\phi\exp\left\{ i \int d^4x (\phi M \phi) \right\} = \mathcal{N}\frac{1}{\text{det}^{{1/2}}{M}}
$$
we have
$$
   e^{i\Gamma[\phi_b]} = \mathcal{N}e^{i\int d^4 x (-\frac{1}{2} \phi_b \partial^2 \phi_b-V(\phi_b))}
   \text{det}^{-1/2}(\partial^2 + V''(\phi_b))
$$
In order to calculate the functional determinant, we need to put it in a specific representation, such as the position representation or the momentum representation, to turn $\partial^2 + V''(\phi_b)$ into a matrix, then calculate the determinant of that infinite dimensional matrix. Writing
$$
 \Gamma[\phi_b] =  \int d^4 x (-\frac{1}{2} \phi_b \partial^2 \phi_b-V(\phi_b)) + \Delta \Gamma[\phi_b],
$$
where
$$
  i\Delta \Gamma[\phi_b] = -\frac{1}{2}\ln \det (\partial^2 +V''(\phi_b)) + \text{const}.
$$
With the help of identity
$$
\ln \det M = \ln \prod_i \lambda_i = \sum_i \ln \lambda_i = \text{tr } {\ln M}
$$
where $\lambda_i$ are the eigenvalues of $M$, we have
$$
  i\Delta \Gamma[\phi_b] = -\frac{1}{2} \text{tr } {\ln (\partial^2 +V''(\phi_b))} + \text{const}.
$$
Next we assume that $\phi_b$ is a const in space-time, and define
$$
  m_{\text{eff}}^2(\phi_b) \equiv  V''(\phi_b),
$$
calculate the functional determinant in the representation of $x$, with the help of
$$
\mathbb{1}= \int \frac{dp^4}{(2\pi)^4}  \left\lvert k \right\rangle  \left\langle{k}\right\rvert  
$$
we have
$$
\begin{align}
  i\Delta \Gamma[\phi_b] &= -\frac{1}{2}\int d^4 x \left\langle{x}\right\rvert  \ln\left( 1+\frac{V''}{\partial^2} \right) \left\lvert{x}\right\rangle  +\text{const}\\
  &= -\frac{1}{2}\int d^4 x \int\frac{d^4 k}{(2\pi)^4}\ln\left( 1-\frac{m_{\text{eff}}^2}{k^2} \right)+\text{const}
\end{align}
$$
where $\int d^4 x = VT$ is the space-time volume of the system.

The integral over momentum is divergent, we will render it finite by a hard cut-off, that is to Wick rotate the system into Euclidean space and insert the momentum cut-off $\Lambda$, yielding
$$
\begin{align}
  \Delta\Gamma[\phi_b] &= -VT \frac{2\pi^2}{2(2\pi)^4} \int_0^\Lambda dk_E k_E^3 \ln(1+\frac{m_{\text{eff}}^2}{k_E3^2}) +\text{const}\\
  &= -  \frac{VT}{128\pi^2} \left( 2 m_{\text{eff}}^2 \Lambda^2 + 2m_{\text{eff}}^4 \ln\frac{m_{\text{eff}}^2}{\Lambda^2}+\text{const}\right)
\end{align}
$$
where $k_E$ is the Wick-rotated momentum and we have used the relation $\Lambda \gg m_{\text{eff}}$. The effective potential accordingly is
$$
 V_{\text{eff}} = V(\phi_b) + c_1 + c_2 m_{\text{eff}}^2 + \frac{1}{64\pi^2} m_{\text{eff}}^4 \ln\frac{m_{\text{eff}}^2}{c_3}
$$
where $c_1,c_2,c_3$ are some $\Lambda$-dependent constants. They are independent of $\phi_b$ thus in general are not of interests to us. For example, $c_2 = \Lambda^2 / 64\pi^2$.

Next we need to add the counter terms to the potential
$$
  V(\phi) = \frac{1}{2}m_R^2(1+\delta_m)\phi^2 +\frac{\lambda_R}{4!}(1+\delta_\lambda)\phi^4 +\Lambda_R (1+\delta_\Lambda),
$$
with all the counter terms starting at 1-loop level, that is of $\mathcal{O}(\lambda_R)$. $m_{\text{eff}}^2$ is still defined as $V''$.

What about the renormalization conditions?

- The question we want to ask is how the quantum corrections change the shape of the potential, when the mass term is zero, thus we require $\lambda_R^2 = 0$
- $V(0) = 0 \implies \Lambda_R = 0$
- $\lambda_R = V''''(\phi_R)$ for some arbitrary fixed scale $\phi_R$

They will fix the counter terms, plugging them in gives
$$
 \boxed{
  V_{\text{eff}}(\phi) = \frac{1}{4!}\phi^4\left\{ \lambda_R + \frac{3 \lambda_R^2}{32\pi^2}\left[ \ln \left( \frac{\phi^2}{\phi_R^2}-\frac{25}{6} \right) \right] \right\}
 }
$$
which is known as Coleman-Weinberg potential.

Now having the effective potential at hand, we can answer the question: does the quantum correction change the vacuum expectation value of $\phi$? Originally, without the quantum correction, the minimum of the potential is at $\phi = 0$ since there is no quadratic term and only a quartic term. With quantum correction, the vev of $\phi$ is given by the minimum of the effective potential, which is the Coleman-Weinberg potential, which is minimized when
$$
  \lambda_R \ln \frac{\left\langle \phi^{2} \right\rangle}{\phi_R^2} = \frac{11}{3} \lambda_R  - \frac{32}{3}\pi^2.
$$
which gives a nonzero $\left\langle \phi \right\rangle$. It means now we have a double-well potential, instead of the original single-well potential, due to the quantum correction.
