---
layout:     post   				                    # 使用的布局（不需要改）
title:      Basic Commutative Algebra		# 标题 
subtitle:   Class 4
date:       2022-11-17 				# 时间
author:     Baiyang Zhang 						# 作者
header-img: img/mathArt9.jpg 	#这篇文章标题背景图片
catalog: true 						# 是否归档
tags:								#标签
    - Math
    - Commutative Algebra
    - Notes
---

### Extension and contraction

Leg $f:A\to B$ be a ring homomorphism. If ${\frak a}$ is an ideal, then $f({\frak a})$ is not necessarily an ideal, since $f$ may maps to only part of the elements of $B$, neglecting some elements to make it an ideal. For example, if $f$ maps $\mathbb{Z}$ to $\mathbb{Q}$, any image of any ideal in $\mathbb{Z}$ is not an ideal in $\mathbb{Q}$. However, we can always construct an ideal generated by $f({\frak a})$, it is called the `extension` of ideal ${\frak a}$, denoted by ${\frak a}^e$,
$$
{\frak a}^e :=  \{ yf(x) \mid x\in f({\frak a}) \}. 
$$

If ${\frak b}$ is an ideal of B, then $f^{-1}({\frak b})$ is always an ideal of $A$, called the `contraction` ${\frak b}^c$ of ${\frak b}$. If ${\frak b}$ is prime, then so is the contraction of it. However, if ${\frak a}\subset A$ is prime, ${\frak a}^e$ need not be prime, take any homomorphism from $\mathbb{Z}$ to $\mathbb{Q}$ for example. 

We can factorize $f$ as follows:
$$
A \xrightarrow{\text{p}} f(A)\xrightarrow{j}B
$$
where $p$ is surjective and $j$ is injective. For $p$ the situation is simple, there is a one-to-one correspondence between the ideals of $A$ containing $\text{ker}(p)$ and ideals of $f(A)$. For $j$, the general situation is quite complicated. The classical example is from algebraic number theory. 

**Example.** Consider $\mathbb{Z}\to \mathbb{Z}[i]$, where $i=\sqrt{ -1 }$. A prime ideal of $\mathbb{Z}$ may not stay a prime ideal when extended to $\mathbb{Z}[i]$.  The situation is as follows,
1. $(2)^e=((1+i)^2)$, the extension of $(2)$ is the ideal generated by the square of a prime ideal in $\mathbb{Z}[i]$,
2. If $p\equiv {1}(\text{mod }4)$, then $p^e$ is the product of two distinct prime ideals. For example, $(5)^e=(2+i)(2-i)$.
3. If $p\equiv {3}(\text{mod }4)$, then $p^e$ is prime in $Z[i]$. 

