
—

—

### When is a function measurable?

In physics, it is very unlikely that one would have to deal with nonmeasurable functions, but still, we should rigorously define what is means to be measurable. 

Suppose that we want to measure the length of the set of all the real numbers, namely the real number axis. Any interval if endowed with certain length, there is no problem measuring that. The union of some measurable intervals also has a well-defined length, there is no problem measuring that as well. The intersection of some measurable intervals are trickier, what if the intersection is just a point? Can you measure the length of a point? Is it zero? Hmm... let's postpone the discussion on that and ignore it for now. What about the complement of a measurable interval? Obviously, **if the full set is measurable**, then the complement of an interval should also be measurable. In light to be these discussions, we define the so-called $\sigma$-algebra,

A class $\mathcal{A}$ of subsets of $X$ is said to be a $\sigma$-algebra (sigma algebra) in $X$ if 
1. $X$ belongs to $\mathcal{A}$, meaning there is no element in $X$ left,
2. any **countable** unions of elements of $\mathcal{A}$ belongs to $\mathcal{A}$,
3. the complement of any elements in $\mathcal{A}$ is also in $\mathcal{A}$.

Note that the so-called sigma algebra is a class of sets with extra structures, so it makes sense to say something is in the sigma algebra.

From these properties it follows that 
-  $\sigma$-algebra is also closed under countable intersection.
- $\emptyset$ is in $\mathcal{A}$ since it is the complement of $X$. 
- If $A,B$ belong to $\mathcal{A}$, then $A - B = A\cap(B^C)$ is in $\mathcal{A}$, 
- If $A,B$ belong to $\mathcal{A}$, then $A \Delta B$ is also in $\mathcal{A}$, where $A\Delta B$ is the symmetric difference of $A$ and $B$, namely all the elements that are either in $A$ or $B$ but not in both $A$ and $B$. In set language, $A\Delta B = (A-B)\cup(B-A)$.

You will find that the definition of sigma algebra is similar to the definition of topology. However there is an essential difference: the complement of a sigma algebra is in the sigma algebra, while in topology the complement of an open set is defined to be a closed set, **not** a open set. Confusing enough, in topology some sets can be both open and closed, they even invented a word for it called clopen. 

Back to $\sigma$-algebra. Le $\mathcal{E}$ be a class of subsets of $X$. 

**Definition** The smallest $\sigma$-algebra containing $\mathcal{E}$ is the $\sigma$-algebra generated by $\mathcal{E}$, denoted $S(\mathcal{E})$.

It means that everything in $\mathcal{E}$ is also in the $\sigma$-algebra. $S(\mathcal{E})$ consists of all the subsets of $X$ that can be made from elements of $\mathcal{E}$ by a countable union, complement and intersection. For example, if $\mathcal{E}$ is empty, then $S(\mathcal{E}) = \{ \emptyset, X \}$.  



**Theorem** Let $f: X \to Y$, $\mathcal{B}$ a $\sigma$-algebra in $Y$, then $\mathcal{A} := f^{-1} \mathcal{B}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra in $X$. 

The reader can check that $\mathcal{A}$ does satisfy all the requirements for a $\sigma$-algebra. For example, since $Y$ is contained in $\mathcal{B}$, and $f$ maps the entirety of $X$ to $Y$, then $f^{-1} \mathcal{B}$ contains $X$. 

**Definition** If $\mathcal{A}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra of $X$, then the pair $(X,\mathcal{A})$ is called a measurable space, and the elements of $\mathcal{A}$ are called measurable sets. 

Accordingly, given a map from $(\mathcal{A},X)$ to $\mathcal{B},Y$, it is said to be a $\mathcal{A}-\mathcal{B}$ measurable map, or just a measurable map if there is no confusion, if the preimage of a measurable set in $\mathcal{B}$ is a measurable set in $\mathcal{A}$. This is very similar to the definition of a continuous map in topology, where a continuous map means that the preimage of a open set is also open. 

